PREFACE 

To those of my own generation, the Hight that 
has but lately failed was the purest that illumined 
their youth. In the gloomy twilight of the later 
nineteenth century it shone as a star of consolation, 
whose radiance attracted and appeased our awaken- 
ing spirits. As one of the many — for there are 
many in France — to whom  was very much 
more than an admired artist : for whom he was a 
friend, the best of friends, the one true friend in 
the whole of European art — I wish to lay before 
this sacred memory my tribute of gratitude and 
of love. 

The days when I learned to know him are 
days that I shall never forget. It was in 1886. 
After some years of silent germination the 
marvellous flowers of Russian art began to blossom 
on the soil of France. Translations of  
and of Dostoyevsky were being issued in feverish 
haste by all the publishing houses of Paris. Be- 
tween the years '85 and '87 came War and Peace, 
Anna Karenin, Childhood and Youth, Polikushka, The 
Death of Ivan Ilyitch, the novels of the Caucasus, 
and the Tales for the People. In the space of a 

few months, almost of a few weeks, there was 

s 



6 PREFACE 

revealed to our eager eyes the presentment of a 
vast, unfamiliar life, in which was reflected a new 
people, a new world. 

I had but newly entered the Normal College. 
My fellow-scholars were of widely divergent 
opinions. In our little world were such realistic 
and ironical spirits as the philosopher Georges 
Dumas ; poets, like Suarcs, burning with love of 
the Italian Renaissance ; faithful disciples of classic 
tradition ; Stendhalians, Wagnerians, atheists and 
mystics. It was a world of plentiful discussion, 
plentiful disagreement ; but for a period of some 
months we were nearly all united by a common 
love of . It is true that each loved him for 
different reasons, for each discovered in him him- 
self ; but this love was a love that opened the door 
to a revelation of life ; to the wide world itself. 
On every side — in our families, in our country 
homes — this mighty voice, which spoke from the 
confines of Europe, awakened the same emotions, 
unexpected as they often were. I remember my 
amazement upon hearing some middle-class people 
of Nivernais, my native province — people who felt 
no interest whatever in art, people who read 
practically nothing — speak with the most intense 
feeling of The Death of Ivan Ilyitch. 

I have read, in the writings of distinguished 
critics, the theory that  owed the best of 
his ideas to the French romantics : to George 
Sand, to Victor Hugo. We may ignore the 
absurdity of supposing that , who could 
not endure her, could ever have been subject 



PREFACE 7 

to the influence of George Sand ; but we cannot 
deny the influence of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and 
of Stendhal ; nevertheless, we belittle the greatness 
of , and the power of his fascination, if 
we attribute them to his ideas. The circle of 
ideas in which art moves and has its being is a 
narrow one. It is not in those ideas that his 
might resides, but in his expression of them ; 
in the personal accent, the imprint of the artist, 
the colour and savour of his life. 

Whether 's ideas were or were not 
borrowed — a matter to be presently considered — 
never yet had a voice like to his resounded through- 
out Europe. How else can we explain the thrill of 
emotion which we all of us felt upon hearing that 
psychic music, that harmony for which we had so 
long waited, and of which we felt the need ? In our 
opinion the style counted for nothing. Most of us, 
myself included, made the acquaintance of Melchior 
de Vogue's work on the subject of the Russian 
novel I after we had read the novels of  ; 
and his admiration of our hero seemed, after ours, 
a pallid thing. M. de Vogii^ spoke Essentially as a 
man of letters pure and simple. But for our part it 
was not enough to admire the presentation of life : 
we lived it ; it was our own. Ours it was by its 
ardent love of life, by its quality of youth ; ours by 
its irony, its disillusion, its pitiless discernment, and 
its haunting sense of mortality. Ours by its dreams 
of brotherly love, of peace among men ; ours by its 
terrible accusation of the lies of civilisation ; ours 

' Le Roman russe. 



8 PREFACE 

by its realism ; by its mysticism ours ; by its savour 
of nature, its sense of invisible forces, its vertigo in 
tie face of the infinite. 

To many of us the novels of  were what 
Wevthcr was to an earlier generation : the wonderful 
mirror of our passions, our strength, our weak- 
nesses, of our hopes, our terrors, our discourage- 
ment. We were in no wise anxious to reconcile 
these many contradictions ; still less did we con- 
cern ourselves to imprison this complex, multiple 
mind, full of echoes of the whole wide world, 
within the narrow limits of religious or political 
categories, as have the greater number of those 
who have written of  in these latter years : 
incapable of extricating themselves from the con- 
flict of parties, dragging him into the arena of their 
own passions, measuring him by the standards of 
their socialistic or clerical coteries. As if our 
coteries could be the measure of a genius ! What 
is it to me if  is or is not of my party? 
Shall I ask of what party Shakespeare was, or Dante, 
before I breathe the atmosphere of his magic or 
steep myself in its light ? 

We did not say, as do the critics of to-day, that 
there were two s : the  of the period 
before the crisis and he of the period after the 
crisis ; that the one was the great artist, while the 
other was not an artist at all. For us there was 
only one , and we loved the whole of him ; 
for we felt, instinctively, that in such souls as his all 
things are bound together and each has its integral 
place. 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

PREFACE . . . . • -5 



CHAPTER 

I. CHILDHOOD . . . • II 



II. BOYHOOD AND YOUTH . . • .21 

HI. YOUTH : THE ARMY . . . 3^ 

IV. EARLY WORK : TALES OF THE CAUCASUS . 37 

V. SEBASTOPOL : WAR AND RELIGION . . 47 

VI. ST. PETERSBURG . . . -59 

VII. "family happiness" • • ¦ 73 
VIII. marriage . . . • . 8i 

IX. "anna karenin" . ... 97 

X. THE crisis ..... 109 

XI. reality ..... 125 



10 CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

XII. ART AND CONSCIENCE .... 133 

XIII. SCIENCE AND ART . . . 143 

XIV. THEORIES OF ART: MUSIC * . -163 

XV. "resurrection" . . . .185 

XVI. RELIGION AND POLITICS . . -197 

XVII. OLD AGE . . . . .217 
XVIII. CONCLUSION ..... 235 

INDEX ..... 249 



I 

CHILDHOOD 



 

CHAPTER I 

CHILDHOOD 

Our instinct was conscious then of that which 
reason must prove to-day. The task is possible 
now, for the long life has attained its term ; reveal- 
ing itself, unveiled, to the eyes of all, with un- 
equalled candour, unexampled sincerity. To-day 
we are at once arrested by the degree in which 
that life has always remained the same, from the 
beginning to the end, in spite of all the barriers 
which critics have sought to erect here and there 
along its course ; in spite of  himself, who, 
like every impassioned mind, was inclined to the 
belief, when he loved, or conceived a faith, that he 
loved or believed for the first time ; that the com- 
mencement of his true life dated from that moment. 
Commencement — recommencement ! How often 
his mind was the theatre of the same struggles, the 
same crises ! We cannot speak of the unity of his 
ideas, for no such unity existed ; we can only speak 

13 



14  

of the persistence among them of the same diverse 
elements ; sometimes allied, sometimes inimical ; 
more often enemies than allies. Unity is to be 
found neither in the spirit nor the mind of a 
 ; it exists only in the internal conflict of 
his passions, in the tragedy of his art and his life. 

In him life and art are one. Never was work 
more intimately mingled with the artist's life ; 